# Telomere-to-telomere consortium Zebrafish project
The most recent zebrafish genome assembly was released in May of 2017. At the time, it was generated with the state-of-the-art sequencing technologies in combination with a high-density genetic map and BAC libraries made from the Tübingen line (TU). The assembly consists of 19,725 contigs assembled into 1,917 scaffolds. Recent advances in both “long-read” sequencing technologies and genome assembly algorithms have made “complete” genome assemblies possible for the first time as has been shown by the recent release of a fully assembled human genome (Nurk et al., Science 2022). We have devised two separate strategies for assembling the zebrafish genome “telomere-to-telomere” (T2T): The first strategy uses homozygous TU fish generated by heat shock disruption of mitosis I. Cell lines were established for two HS diploid fish and then genomic DNA was isolated both from the adult tissues as well as the cultured fibroblasts. DNA from the tissue was used for PacBio HiFi sequencing and the fibroblast DNA was used for Oxford Nanopore sequencing (ONT). We will perform de novo assembly using either the Verkko or HiFiasm genome assemblers. The second strategy we termed the “3 generations” approach. One fish from each of the 4 most commonly used zebrafish lab lines: TU, AB, WIK, and TL were used as the 4 “grandparents” and were short read sequenced to document all unique, identifying SNV for each parent. One fish from each of the 2 grandparent pairings was used to generate pools of the 3rd generation offspring. The pooled genomic DNA from these offspring was used for both PacBio HiFi and ONT sequence. The SNV data from the grandparents is then used to separate all the reads into haplotype bins and all 4 haplotypes are resolved simultaneously using the Verkko assembler. Preliminary data for strategy 1 has an assembly of 1.45GB in 242 contigs, a 100-fold reduction in the number of gaps in the current assembly and an additional 75 million bases of sequence (5% increase). We will discuss progress in obtaining a T2T assembly and some interesting aspects of the new assemblies we are discovering.


